[PRP-347] Participant Documentation (#114)
navapbc/wic-participant-recertification-portal: docs/participant/development.md

# Development

> This application can be run directly on a developer's computer, or in a parallel to the deployment environments it can be run in [Docker](docker.com/). The object storage and relational database needs could be served by any compatible solution, but by default are run using [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) in containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This application can be run directly on a developer's computer, or in a parallel to the deployment environments, it can be run locally in [Docker](https://docker.com/). The object storage and relational database needs could be served by any compatible solution, but by default are run using [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) in containers.
```

## Prerequisites

- 💻 Items marked with a 💻 are for development on the application **outside** of the Docker container.
- 📦 Items marked with a 📦 are for development on the application **inside** a Docker container.
- 💻📦 Items marked with both are requirements for **both** (running the application inside or outside of Docker).

Supporting services (Minio, Postgres) run inside of Docker for both cases

### 💻📦 Docker

The easiest way to install Docker on your laptop or desktop is to use [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/).

Follow the instructions and install Docker Desktop, then start it.

### 💻 NPM / NVM and NodeJS

#### Installing NVM

Documentation for NPM indicates a preference to use NVM to manage versions of Node.

You can install it [directly by following the instructions](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) on the Github repository

You could also utilize [Brew](https://brew.sh/) on MacOS by running `brew install nvm` on the command line (after installing Brew)

#### Using NVM to install NodeJS

1.  Open your command line utility

> 2.  Change directories to the `participant` folder `cd participant`
> 3.  Install Node using `nvm install v19.1.0`
> 4.  Instruct NVM to `nvm use v19.1.0`

Reviewer: We're using node 18, so these directions should be changed to reflect that.

```suggestion
2.  Change directories to the `participant` folder: `cd participant`
3.  Install Node: `nvm install v19.1.0`
4.  Instruct NVM to use the installed version: `nvm use v19.1.0`
```

#### Run NPM install to install packages

Now that you have NVM to manage Node versions, and a compatible version of NodeJS, you can
install the necessary packages for the Participant application using `npm`

This should only need to happen when the contents of `package.json` change

> 1.  Open your command line utility
> 2.  Change directories to the `participant` folder with `cd participant`
> 3.  Run `npm install -D` (this will take several minutes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Open your command line utility
2.  Change directories to the `participant` folder: `cd participant`
3.  Install packages (this will take several minutes): `npm install -D`
```

> ### 💻 Run the Remix application outside of Docker

Reviewer: I think you can decrease the headings by one level from here onwards so that "Prerequisites", Running outside of Docker, Running inside of docker, Form submissions, and Document submissions are all at the same level

We've got Docker, NodeJS and our required packages installed.

Now, we can start the application from the command line, in the `participant` folder.

This will take several minutes the first time you run this command, as necessary Docker images and containers are set up.

Future application starts should take ~30 seconds.

> This command copies the example environment file so that the application code can read these variables and connect to
> the Docker hosted services.
> 
> 1.  `cp .env.example .env`
> 
> This command does several things - starts the postgres container, migrates the database schema, inserts seed records for clinic sites, builds the CSS stylesheets, starts the
> Minio S3 local container, creates an S3 Bucket to store files in, and finally starts the Remix service.
> 
> 2.  `npm run dev`

Reviewer: The formatting for this is hard to follow. Suggested edit:

```suggestion
This command copies the example environment file so that the application code can read these variables and connect to
the Docker hosted services.

1.  Copy the example environment variables file so that the application code can read these variables and connect to the Docker hosted services: `cp .env.example .env`
2.  Start the server: `npm run dev`
  - This command does several things. It starts the postgres container, migrates the database schema, inserts seed records for clinic sites, builds the CSS stylesheets, starts the Minio S3 local container, creates an S3 Bucket to store files in, and finally starts the Remix service.
```

You will see the last line of the log output when the server is ready:

> Remix App Server started at http://localhost:3000 (http://10.10.10.240:3000)

You can click on that link directly to open the Participant Portal in your default web browser.

The default port for Remix is 3000, but the application will choose other ports based on availability (3001, 3002, etc) if 3000 is unavailable.

### 📦 Run the Remix application inside docker

The application can be run inside a Docker container, with a bind-mount to the local `/app` code (meaning changes to that code will still update the application within the container)

#### Start the docker compose stack

From the `/participant` directory:

`docker compose up`

### 💻📦 About the local version of the application

Changes to the code in the `participant` folder will cause the app to dynamically restart automatically.

> Changes to CSS need to be built, using the `npm run css` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes to CSS need to be manually triggered: `docker compose exec remix_dev npm run css`
```

> #### Form Submissions

Reviewer: This shouldn't be nested under Running the app in Docker

Form submissions will be stored in the local Docker postgres database. This should be durable across restarts of the application
stack.

You can connect to this database to view or alter form submissions with a postgres-compatible database client.

With Brew on a Mac, you can:

1.  Install the command line client with `brew install libpq`

> 2.  Connect to the database with `psql -h127.0.0.1 -Upostgres`

Reviewer: Not sure if you want to include this, but you can also avoid the additional brew install and run `docker compose exec postgres psql -U postgres`
